MLBasisPathMap
==============

An <:MLBasis:ML Basis> _path map_ describes a map from ML Basis path
variables (of the form `$(VAR)`) to file system paths.  ML Basis path
variables provide a flexible way to refer to libraries while allowing
them to be moved without changing their clients.

The format of an `mlb-path-map` file is a sequence of lines; each line
consists of two, white-space delimited tokens.  The first token is a
path variable `VAR` and the second token is the path to which the
variable is mapped.  The path may include path variables, which are
recursively expanded.

The mapping from path variables to paths is initialized by reading a
system-wide configuration file: `/usr/lib/mlton/mlb-path-map`.
Additional path maps can be specified with `-mlb-path-map` and
individual path variable mappings can be specified with
`-mlb-path-var` (see <:CompileTimeOptions:>).  Configuration files are
processed from first to last and from top to bottom, later mappings
take precedence over earlier mappings.

The compiler and system-wide configuration file makes the following
path variables available.

[options="header",cols="^25%,<75%"]
|====
|MLB path variable|Description
|`SML_LIB`|path to system-wide libraries, usually `/usr/lib/mlton/sml`
|`TARGET_ARCH`|string representation of target architecture
|`TARGET_OS`|string representation of target operating system
|`DEFAULT_INT`|binding for default int, usually `int32`
|`DEFAULT_WORD`|binding for default word, usually `word32`
|`DEFAULT_REAL`|binding for default real, usually `real64`
|====
